Hello and welcome back to the course on databases in the previous tutorial we investigated this transaction
stable to find out if it's an second normal form and what we found was that it actually isn't in second
normal form that there are some columns which are first names or names shipping state and loyalty discount
which don't conform to the definition of the second or form and specifically we have this candidate
key stamp Plus customer ID.
These two columns together either a candidate key and each one of these columns on each one of them
doesn't or none of them depends wholly or fully on this candidate.
So if any one of these four columns you take for example first name it only depends on customer ID doesn't
depend on a timestamp in seconds.
So therefore these four columns need to be moved to a separate table and that's exactly what we're going
to be doing today.
We're going to be bringing our database into second normal form.
So we're very excited Tauriel ahead.
Let's get started right away.
All right.
So today we are going to separate customer specific columns and how do we do that.
Well first of all we're going to write a short select statement we're going to say select and then we'll
get a customer ID then we're going to say call my first name which is going to list all those columns
including the customer ID card because in our resulting table we want this customer as you call him
because that's going to be our primary key in that new table and it's going to be our foreign key in
this current table.
So go ahead and do that.
All right so first name Qamar who's going to be surname coma.
Actually First we don't need a capital.
In fact in this specific dataset or database we are just dealing with non-capital So we just give the
Wal-Mart capital and also this underlining sometimes gets in the way Sachiko to options.
Text Editor transactor GYO Intellisense and then well this should be off and that should take care of
it.
All right so let's try that again.
Will underline errors.
Yes.
And then we'll go back to options and take it off.
So hopefully that takes care of it.
All right there we go so surname.
Then we want shipping state shipping state and we want loyalty discounts.
So if we just select all of these all of us in each sector from from transactions that's how table.
So if we just run this code will select those columns and now we want to put them into a temporary table
so we'll just create a temporary table for us which will be displayed here just now so if we run that
select into fraud.
So this is a select into statement.
Basically it's like just the way we created it right.
Right select from and then in-between you add the into the MP or whatever other name of the table you
want to specify.
So there we go.
That's three thousand four hundred fifty five rose and if we refresh your you will see that we have
this tempy table.
So let's go ahead and selects our from Tempe just for fun.
You'll see that here we've got this temporary table of all not just these specific columns that we wanted
to separate have been separate actually.
Customer ID should be like that.
But it's too late now and it doesn't really matter because this is a temporary tables leave it as it
was.
All right.
So temporary table is there what we want to do with this table is we want to remove duplicates and what
does that mean.
Well you'll see that here we got three thousand four hundred fifty five Rosewell.
We know that we only have just over 900 customers so obviously there's lots of duplicates in here.
And why is that.
Well the reason is because where did this data come from it came from the Transactions table and all
we did is we just just extracted these specific columns these ones including loyalty discount and obviously
here sometimes customers purchase several times and therefore they will come up in this table many times.
We just don't have the information about the transactions anymore just the customers.
And therefore now we need to remove duplicate.
So let's go ahead and do that.
Remove duplicates.
I want to say select this thing.
So we were worked of distinct a little bit into customers that's going to be our actual table from Tempe.
So this is a handy little trick on how to separate unique color unique rows out of a table so we're
going to run this and see 942.
So that's how many customers we have.
And now if you look at select star from customers you'll see that you only each one of these roses uniques
doesn't come.
They don't come up several times.
And why is this a handy little trick.
Because what we did here is so separating the columns or what we want to do we already from this very
start know that we want to take out just the unique Kolbe's but also to do it right away and one statement
will be quite a complex query.
So the handy little trick that we use here is we first select the columns that we want to separate out
right into a temporary table and then from that temporary table it's very easy to select the distinct
rows.
Then we just say Select Distinct start from P into customers.
So if we wanted like we could have used the table customers here.
But instead we're putting in a temporary table transitional table for the data it goes into a temporary
table and then from the temporary table it goes into the customers table and is ready is exactly as
we want it to be.
So that is a handy little trick.
Now we have this customer table and our final step here is we need to check if it's in the second normal
form because for this whole database to be in second form every single table has to be a second order
form and we're going into while we're here we're going to check that.
But before we proceed with that I wanted to draw your attention to this tempy table.
Is just a good example of a table that is not in first normal form because we know that this table contains
duplicates.
We're not going to look for them now but we know that this table contains duplicates and therefore it
doesn't conform to the condition of first initial form.
So if you were looking for an example of a table that's not in first normal form it's this one here
selects star or the tempy table that we have is not enforceable.
But anyway let's get back to our customers table.
We want to check if it's actually in second normal form or not.
How do we do that.
Well we really know how to check.
Second all are form we need to check that every single non-prime attribute tells us a fact about the
whole of every single candidate key.
So basically it depends fully on every single candidate.
Well the thing here is that we only have one candidate.
Well we know that this is our primary key in this table because it's uniquely identifies every single
customer is a customer ID and so it is by definition a candidate key.
The question is are there any other candidate keys in this table.
Well Ken first name bites how big can it get.
No it cannot because separate is different customers can have the same name in fact different customers
can have the same name and the same surname.
They can even have the same name surname and live in the same state and have the same loyalty discount
and even if it's not the case this is an important point even if it's not the case in your specific
database so let's say your database had only had only me know and only five rows like that.
Right so here you'd be able to say oh actually first name is unique.
No we know two customers have the same first name.
What would you need to think well the way you need to think about it is hypothetically right.
If this database keeps growing if more data is added to this table can first name be the same for two
customers.
It's about the design not actually what you have in the table.
And by design this table is used to service customers of an organization and it can easily happen to
them have the same person and they can have the same customer ID because that's the way the table is
designed.
But first they've started him shipping Santigold discount.
They can all happen to be the same for 32 different customers.
So therefore this these four columns together do not make up a candidate key and therefore not know
combination of these columns make up a candidate key as well.
So that means we only have one candidate key here customer ID and we have four non-prime attributes
first name surname ship said loyalty discount.
And because our candidate key consists of only one column we can split it up.
That means that indeed every single one of these non-prime attributes depends fully on the on the candidate
key and therefore we have confirmed that this table is indeed in second normal form.
So to an F confirmed.
All right.
So we know that one of our two tables we were worried about the wrong transaction table so this refresh
we're not worried about the wrong table or the TMB table.
These are our working tables so we know that customers is Internet.
We all have to do is to check transactions.
So now what we're going to do is we're going to say this out a comment so we can navigate this cold
later on if we need to.
Let's go back to our transactions table now.
All right.
So what we want to do here is we want to bring up our transactions sale and see what's going on there.
So there's a transaction tables and what we can see here is customer ID is still in the table.
First name surname shipping and large discount are still in table.
Why is that.
Well that is because we actually did take them all.
We didn't take them out.
We actually just copied them.
We took these columns and we made a copy of them put them into the translate into the tempy file of
home table and then kept working with them but we never took them out.
So now is the time to actually remove them from this new form this old table says.
What we can do is say remove customer specific columns but we're going to say but leave the customer
id call them.
Why do you want to leave the customer and call them in the stable because the customer id call them
is actually our foreign key that will allow us to join this table to the customers table because if
we remove the customer id call them as well.
Then we will lose all connection to the customers table and we will not be able to re read create this
information will not be able to match up the transaction to the customers so it's important to always
remember to really leave that foreign key that important part that's actually going to be the link between
the old adjusted table and the brand new table that has been extracted from it.
So there we go.
Let's go ahead and do that and say alter or table transactions and then all say drop call them and then
we're just going to say drop which columns around the gun shop.
We wanted a first name or first actually smaller letters right.
First Name Last Name is not actually said it.
They don't want to drop shipping so they want drop.
We'll see.
Discount.
All right.
So don't drop those columns and you'll notice here that it's a bit different to postgresql.
I'll pose reskill.
You would need to say drop column every like like that.
But in Trossachs skill or in Microsoft skills or you don't just say drop call them and then list the
call if you want to drop.
So that's an interesting distinction.
And here all you have to do is just an undisclosed bank successfully and now you just check select star
for all transactions run that they go you can see that those calls are gone and now it's very easy to
check of this tables into an.
We can right away say that this table is indeed into an F in second normal form because we have removed
those columns that were preventing it from being in second normal form.
So we've already checked the condition the criteria of the second form for these remaining columns and
we don't need to do it again.
So we can just say simply two and if confirmed and while the other was to capitals in light of hostile.
And one final step that we need to do is we need to drop this team at the table.
It's always a good idea to clean up after yourself in the table.
So it's a really simple line of code draw up table tempy run that and the refresh you'll see is gone.
All right so there we go that's how we convert a database from a first normal form to a second normal
form so we know that our database wasn't in second form when we just had the transactions table by itself.
We did that check previously and then we learned how to take that one table and split it out into several
tables so we went through this process of spreading out those columns and making sure that they're unique
those rows are unique in the new table and then removing those columns and then dropping a temporary
table.
That's how we approach changing the tide changing the database.
From my first animal form to a second normal form and so second form as you can see why is it good.
Well if you look at transactions now you don't have information anymore on the customer name surname
loyalty discount their stage you know there where they live and so on because it's not necessary.
It's in this table it's it was just being duplicated and copied many many times and was taking up space
whereas now that information lives in the Customers table it is only recorded once per customer.
So as soon as we get a new customer gets the customer gets added here and then will be in 942 it'll
be 943 arose and so on.
So it's only recorded once and there's only this one single source of truth about the customer.
So there's a much lesser chance of error instead of when you have this information copied over and over
and over again.
What if one of those rows is incorrect and then you don't know which ones correct which was incorrect
but also an important part is that this is this will save us space and this will help our database work
faster.
So that is why OLTP type databases and functions actually processing that data type but databases should
be at least all.
Why isn't the second normal form is beneficial for the or LTE type databases because it helps save space
helps reduce potential for error and helps speed them up.
So there we go.
I hope you enjoyed today's tutorial and I look forward to seeing you next time.
Until then happy analyzing.